Homage to the Buddha Shakyamuni. Greetings to
all fellow practitioners. Dear fellow practitioners,
we are Buddhists, and our
understanding is quite limited
because we have studied, but
we usually only learn about things
related to our daily lives. We only
understand what
relates to us and what we
can apply the Buddha's teachings to
transform our lives. We pay attention
to those things, we pay
attention to those teachings, and we
experience
those teachings through our practical practice.
As Buddhists,
we usually dedicate
this merit to the Western
Pure Land because in the Amitabha Sutra
and the Sutra of Contemplation of Infinite Life,
the realm of
Amitabha Buddha is described very clearly. In
that realm, we see the Kalavinka birds
singing, echoing the
Dharma, and what happens in the morning and at
noon.  How do we eat?
Where do we go?
What are the bathing pools like? What are the buildings like? What are the trees like? That's
why
Buddhists are very interested in the Western Pure Land.
But even in the Western Pure Land, one
still continues to practice
until one can reach the highest level, the
Supreme Rebirth. That's why
Buddhists are so
interested in the Western Pure Land because the
realm there is described according to
our understanding, so
we feel very confident when we reach the
Western Pure Land. As for the
Nirvana realm, it is the highest realm,
even more wondrous than the Western Pure Land.
However, because of
our understanding through
the teachings of the venerable teachers or
in the scriptures,
our level of comprehension is
not
clear. For example,
we think of it as empty, silent, or that there are
no people there, it's vast,
but there are also some monks and masters.
According to the Buddhist perspective,
even the enlightened ones don't fully understand it. Therefore, they
say that after death, one enters the realm of
Nirvana, where there is nothing left,
only a magnetic field. Some
teachers also teach that
after death, when the saints enter Nirvana, there is
no longer any form, nothing left. That is, there is nothing left.
It is only a magnetic field. Goodness is
everywhere in this world, throughout the universe; there
is no place that is called
a living realm.
Therefore, Buddhists say, "I don't know what Nirvana is
like because I don't understand it clearly."
So, they don't want to go there. They just want to go to the
Western Pure Land. They
clearly see it, eat and sleep there. In the morning, they
pick flowers to offer to the Buddhas, then they cook, they
hear birds singing, the
trees are made of gold, silver, diamonds, and
many other treasures, and then they go down to the seven-jeweled pond to
bathe. So, they really, really like going there.
Today, together with our
esteemed fellow practitioners, we will explore the
realm of Nirvana through the teachings
of the Venerable Arhat Na Tien.
Now, I invite all of you to join hands and recite the
Buddha's name, seeking his guidance,
as we enter this Dharma sharing session: Namo Buddha Shakyamuni, Namo Buddha Shakyamuni, Namo Buddha Shakyamuni.
Respectfully, dear fellow practitioners, in lesson 173, titled "
Why not describe
Nirvana specifically?",
Master Thich Chuc Thai Minh explained
all the points in the sutra in great detail. However, with the
intention of focusing on Nirvana, we will only see
a small part, a small idea, so
that we can clearly see what the
realm of Nirvana is like, so that
we can awaken the
desire to reach it. Because we desire it,
we will diligently
practice. Otherwise, our minds,
when practicing, are merely dedicating ourselves to
Nirvana, not yet truly reaching it.  When we truly
dedicate our merits, we often do so in a
very vague way, like saying, "I dedicate my merits to
Nirvana," but along with
that, we might be wishing for our
family to be like this and that.
Of these two desires,
the desire for our family
might occupy 90 minutes, while the remaining 10 minutes are
superficial – the desire to reach
Nirvana. But if we understand
the realm of
Nirvana and truly desire it,
this genuine desire generates
a great deal of merit. This
merit, combined with
our current actions, is
channeled into our
current actions. Therefore,
we will transform our karma
more quickly because we have a clear understanding – that
is, we understand this and
we desire it. This is
called receiving merit through enlightenment.
Therefore, we need to understand this more deeply.
The state of Nirvana becomes clear
when we dedicate our merits, because
Nirvana is the highest state. If
someone practices and desires
Nirvana, that desire is much higher than
reaching the Western Paradise, dear fellow
practitioners, because Nirvana is complete
enlightenment. Even there,
if one hasn't reached the highest level of rebirth in the Western Paradise, they
still have to go to the borderlands, then to the
lower levels, and then practice for
countless more eons to reach the middle
level, and then to the highest level of
rebirth. That is, the journey is
very long, countless
eons. Because practicing for one day in
this realm is equivalent to practicing for 100 years in the realm of
Amitabha Buddha, the realm of Amitabha Buddha—a very long journey, dear fellow
practitioners. Therefore, to find
absolute happiness, there are still many eons to come.
So, with a mind focused on
perfect contemplation, we all hope that
we can achieve Nirvana faster, that
is, here we are.  If
not in this life, then in the next life, and the life after
that, and the life after that... During that journey,
we have the protection of Bodhicitta,
so we will be able to
progress. Then, Venerable Nāgasena
explained to King Minanda that
all the teachings were
very vague—like Nirvana being a place of silence, Nirvana being a
place of pure cessation.
King Minanda also understood
our karmic conditions;
this Age of Decline is very difficult to understand, very
doubtful when we don't understand clearly
when practicing, reciting, or listening to the scriptures.
Therefore, out of
compassion for sentient beings in this Age of
Decline, King Minanda asked Venerable Nāgasena so that he could
use his wisdom
to suit the capacities of sentient beings in this
Age of Decline. He gave us
examples to explain
clearly so that we could understand the realm of
Nirvana. If we don't understand the
realm of Nirvana clearly, we will be
confused and fall into wrong views. For example, he said
...  Nirvana is nothingness, meaning there is nothing
left. There is no scene,
no people in Nirvana, no
form, nothing at all. It is
like the void, this empty space, there is no
realm, nothing at all. That is falling
into wrong views. At some point, one might think
it is a magnetic field. So we
see, now, if we practice for a certain
period of time, we become a
magnetic field, like an electromagnetic wave, floating
in this empty space. We do
n't understand. We humans, who
have so much joy and happiness,
now become a mindless, emotionless magnetic field, without
feelings or
sensations. Like our Buddha Shakyamuni,
when he attained enlightenment,
he still had this physical body, called existence. In
Nirvana, he still moved around, he still
did
everything according to the needs of sentient beings,
but he was always clear-sighted and
silent, not disappearing into
nothingness. So what is the realm of
Nirvana? Nothingness.  If we become confused,
we will fall into wrong views, and falling into wrong
views will cause us to lose merit, and
we will slander Nirvana. So,
this article, the first part of the question is very long,
so I will only take the
answer from Venerable Nāgasena.
Venerable Nāgasena
gives 13 examples
to explain the realm of Nirvana for
us to easily understand. These 13 examples are the 13
virtues of 13 things to
illustrate: firstly, the
virtue of the lotus flower has one virtue; secondly, the
virtue of water has two virtues
similar to Nirvana; thirdly,
snake venom antidote has three virtues similar
to Nirvana; fourthly, the great ocean has
four virtues similar to Nirvana; fifthly, food has five virtues similar to Nirvana;
sixthly, emptiness has ten virtues similar to Nirvana; seventhly, the
Mani jewel has
three virtues similar to Nirvana; eighthly, the
red sandalwood has three virtues similar to Nirvana.  The
ninth Nirvana is
sapi milk, which is liquid butter yogurt, possessing three
similar qualities to Nirvana. The tenth Nirvana is the mountain peak, possessing five
similar qualities to Nirvana. The explanation from the two enlightened masters, Hy Tam Chieu Hoan Quan, summarizes the content for easy understanding. We are usually in the realm of worldly perception, and we perceive a realm,
that is, a country. A country
includes its area, its
inhabitants, and its
happiness index. Hy Tam Chieu Hoan Quan
also relies on
this worldly knowledge to
interpret the teachings of the great master Na Tien,
making it consistent
with the three criteria we
commonly accept.
First, the size of Nirvana;
that is, people say
how much the area of ​​Vietnam is, and
what its shape is.  The area of
Nirvana is vast,
boundless. Even if countless beings from
this life and the next enter and reside there,
Nirvana will not become fuller. For example, consider
Vietnam, with its population of
over 100 million.
We might think that's a moderate population,
but if
Vietnam were to
reach 1 billion, 2 billion,
or 3 billion, it
would be too crowded. That's why
we have
family planning policies, initially allowing
one child, then two, then adjusting to three, then two,
then even one. And so we
implement family planning. That's how we manage to restrict family life.
But in Nirvana, regardless of whether you have
beings from past, present, or future lives,
everyone will eventually arrive there.  No matter how much there is, it will
never be crowded. That's the place of Nirvana. Is it
happier than where we are? We
never have to worry about crowded land or
rising land prices. Living there is so
comfortable; the area is
vast, my dear friends. So
we don't have to suffer from fighting over land or
housing. We see
happiness there!
Nirvana is also the highest realm.
How is the highest realm determined?
For example,
hell is the lowest, then second is the realm of hungry ghosts,
third is the realm of animals, fourth is the
human realm, fifth is the heavenly realm. And
then all the heavens, the
higher and higher they get,
this level of height refers to the
happiness index of the inhabitants of that realm.
Nirvana
is the highest realm in the six realms of
reincarnation. So we are only in the fourth realm, right? Hell, hungry
ghosts, animals, and so on. And there are
so many
more heavens above us! So happiness...
Our blessings here, compared to this realm,
are only the fourth. That's nothing compared to the
many higher heavens, and so much
more. Nirvana doesn't move, doesn't fall, doesn't shake, does
n't tremble.
Dear fellow practitioners, in
our earthly realm, for example, if the earth is damaged by
waves, floods, or landslides, the
earth expands, it moves,
right? It crumbles, it
falls, and then it falls again.
And if we experience an earthquake, the earth shakes, and even if we try to stop it, the
earth shakes again.
For example, if
a meteorite were to
hit the earth, the earth
would be shaken, right?
But Nirvana doesn't move, doesn't fall, doesn't tremble, doesn't tremble. So,
in Nirvana, we don't have to
worry about earthquakes, tsunamis,
floods, or
anything at all. Isn't that wonderful? It's incredibly wonderful! We don't have to worry about those
things, we don't
have to suffer those things.  Furthermore, in
Nirvana, no one can suppress others. For example,
in our realm, if a
nation is strong, the neighboring nation
is suppressed. For instance,
how many vassal states does a country have? Those are the
states that are suppressed and dependent.
But in the distant past, we had many
great powers from
ancient times.
Each of those great powers
had many vassal states,
and those states were suppressed. But in Nirvana, there is
no suppression, no
suppression of anything at all.
Furthermore, in Nirvana,
no one can steal or possess anything. No
one can own anything. For example, in
our country in ancient times, the land belonged to the king. The
king owned the land, the
king managed it. This land belonged to the king,
this land belonged to the officials, this land belonged to
someone else, this land belonged
to someone else. But in Nirvana,
there is no ownership; no one can possess anything.
No one can possess Nirvana;
we live and go to a place of
comfort where no one owns it. Isn't that great?
No one owns it, but we are
free there, not oppressed,
not controlled. We can be wherever we want, go wherever we want, it's
so vast and boundless,
without any restrictions, we can go wherever we want, do
whatever we want. That's
my understanding, to make it easier to
understand.
No one can steal or possess it,
so in Nirvana, there's no such
thing, no theft
at all, no stealing of anything, not even the
land there. I'm
using the word "land" for easier understanding,
not that it's just land. That means
no one can steal and no one can
own anything in
Nirvana; it's so comfortable. That's
happiness. As for us,
because when parents die, they divide the land among their
children, and sometimes the children
even fight and kill their parents,
and siblings fight and kill each other just for the sake of...  It's not about
fighting over tiny plots of land, or maybe just
20 centimeters of land encroaching on another's property,
or even just 5 centimeters—no need for much.
Even 5 centimeters of land can lead to endless
legal battles and
painful disputes. But up there,
that doesn't happen; it's peaceful, no one owns anything, it's
very happy.
Secondly, what ethnic groups make up the inhabitants of Nirvana?
For example, in Vietnam,
we have 54 ethnic groups,
including the Kinh people, and many
other minority groups. There are
so many brotherly ethnic groups. So
here, the inhabitants of Nirvana are countless enlightened
beings,
free from defilements, living a life of happiness and peace. True Nirvana
has only one type of inhabitants,
not dozens of ethnic groups, there is
no racial discrimination because
there is only one type of inhabitants:
the enlightened beings, free from defilements,
living a life of happiness and peace. True
Nirvana is the dwelling place of
these enlightened beings.  We see that the
saints move around freely there, but it's not like
they're frozen in place. It
's something like
robots, just walking and walking like this.
Sometimes it feels like there's a void, a
void, a void, but it's just a
mind free from greed, anger, and delusion. The rest of the time, the
saints are always clear-sighted, free from greed, anger, and delusion, living
a life of peace, happiness, and true permanence. It's
not a heavy emptiness, a place where there's
no one, no thing, absolutely nothing. So, if
we
understand it that way, then
we all think, "Let's go to the Western Paradise, to
Nirvana." We don't understand what it is, whether it's
robots, or no people, or nothing at
all. If we say there are
forms, then it's not Nirvana.
Here, Nirvana is just the emptiness of the
mind. If there are forms in the mind, then it's not
called a peaceful mind—the forms of greed, anger, and delusion.
But the saints are always compassionate,
always joyful,
always seeing compassion.  Compassion, joy, and equanimity are the
constant states of mind for the
enlightened beings, residing in pure and clear minds that
perceive everything. We, too,
have minds, but they are constantly filled with greed, anger, envy, and defilement.
We have minds, and the enlightened beings also
have minds, but their minds
are like this: empty, heavy,
devoid of those other mental states. That's
how they are. As for the happiness index, the happiness index on this earthly realm is absolute, free from defilement, affliction, anger, and negative thoughts. They are far removed from love and hate. That is, in our view,
people usually treat each other according to
cultural norms. We call it treating each other
uncultured, treating each other with
culture, treating each other
politely, treating each other rudely. But
here, the enlightened beings are completely
free from defilement and affliction; it is
absolute, far removed from
love and hate. That is, we here
love others.  One might hate another, but
up there, everyone is equal;
there's no favoritism or
hatred. For example, in a family,
parents treat their children equally. If all three
children are treated equally,
wouldn't that be better? Wouldn't
that be better for all three children? They would all
live equally, without love or
hate. That is, not loving or
hating doesn't mean there's nothing, but rather a
lack of discrimination and compassion. True peace is compassion,
true tranquility. This tranquility does
n't even have the outward appearance of compassion; it's
already peaceful. Who needs love
or compassion? Who needs hatred? That is,
a
life is entirely the domain of wisdom.
It's like two people who know each other. For
example, if two people want to carry a flower arrangement, they both
know where to
place their hands,
and they carry the flower arrangement
perfectly, without needing any
adjustments. That is, nothing
more needs to be said.  Here, dear fellow practitioners, the Heart
Sutra says this so that we can easily understand
this ordinary life, meaning that it
doesn't need anything else because the beings are
completely wise. Nirvana
nourishes the immortal life of sentient beings,
preventing decay and death.
We are here, and there are
crematoriums, and even places
called morgues for the dead—
what are they called? Cryogenic chambers, where the dead are kept, then
crematoriums, then cemeteries, and then
mourning the death. We mourn each
other when dead, we mourn when sick, we
care for each other, we mourn sorrow and grief.
But here, no one ever dies. Once they arrive
there, they have immortal life
forever, forever beautiful,
without aging or decay.  It will always be like that,
with such beautiful and virtuous generals. Do you see, dear fellow practitioners, that it is so wonderful and
so
happy? There is wisdom there, there is
precious wisdom and virtue, a place that gives sentient beings divine
power and energy. Everyone there is
so wise, everyone there is so powerful,
everyone there is so precious virtue.
Now, two people living with
wisdom, living together, are they happy?
Two people living together with
equality, with equality and clear wisdom,
they live together in
tranquility, but their hearts are always joyful and happy because everything is
as they wish, and they are very happy.
Similarly, Nirvana is the place where
all kinds of fragrant flowers gather, born
from pure dharmas, with
countless perfect and good virtues that
cannot be counted, dear fellow practitioners.
There are countless perfect and good virtues,
Nirvana, which fulfills
wishes, brings joy, brings peace.
That is the realm of happiness, dear fellow
practitioners. Don't you see, it's a place
worth living in, dear fellow practitioners?  We see that
Nirvana is a truly livable place,
as we say, Da Nang is a
livable place, so let's buy tickets
there, buy a house there to live in. We
call it a livable place, and we
see that
its happiness index will be better. So, Nirvana is
also an
absolutely happy place, a
very livable place because once you
reach Nirvana, there is no
aging, no death, no
sickness, nothing at all. It's an absolutely happy place.
So, let's see
where it is to go. For example, we
say Da Nang is a livable place,
Ho Chi Minh City is a livable place,
Hanoi is a livable place. So
we have to find the geographical location, right?
And how do we get there? Well, it's right
here. Geographically, Nirvana is nowhere in particular. It's
not in the north,
not in the east,
not in the west, not in the south, but
everywhere, my dear friend.  Do you see
that
everywhere, there is no place without the
realm of Nirvana? In every
place, is there Nirvana? If I
look, I
can't see anything, only air. So why do you say the realm of
Nirvana is here? Why do I see it like that? Then
the saints have
their own realms, but
we don't see or
know their realms. For
example, we are just dust particles,
right? For example,
this earth of ours, in
the realm of the saints, is nothing, nothing, just something,
something without
form. That's how we perceive it.
That's our perception,
dust, smoke, all sorts of
things. But when it
corresponds to Nirvana, there is nothing left; it is
transparent, beautiful, pure, and
without these things.
This part is a bit difficult.  Let me understand a little. So, where is
Nirvana? It's right here. The scriptures
teach this: any practitioner
who is pure in morality, pure in concentration, pure in
wisdom, and firmly rooted in that state of
morality, concentration, and wisdom, in that place,
Nirvana will appear, regardless of
where they are or what place they are in. That is, if we
are here and we cultivate morality, concentration, and wisdom to achieve enlightenment,
we will attain Nirvana
here. Do you understand this point, dear fellow practitioners? We will attain
Nirvana here, but don't expect to
see Nirvana, because
we cannot feel Nirvana.
Nirvana will appear at that time.
For example, if we go outside the
door and
see the sky,
then we just need to stay rooted in
morality, concentration, and wisdom, and Nirvana will appear. That
is, at that moment, we will see
Nirvana. So, Nirvana is not outside our
minds.  The precepts are our minds. For example,
not killing, not stealing, not committing
adultery, not lying, not getting drunk or
addicted—these are within our minds, not
outside. That's why
we see the state of
Nirvana. And where is the state of Nirvana? It's right here in
our minds.
Just purify your
minds, and you will see Nirvana. Do you understand
this, dear fellow practitioners? Let's
go outside, and we'll see the
sky. Now, sitting inside,
we ask, "Where is the sky?" The sky is right
here, isn't it? It's
here, it hasn't gone anywhere.
So why is it here?
Now, smash this house to pieces. Do you see
the sky? Sit still, do you see the
sky? Yes, dear fellow practitioners. Where is the sky? I say, "The sky is
right
here." I say, "Where is the sky?" Now,
smash the whole house, the ceiling, the roof
tiles. Smash everything, and you will
see the sky. The sky will appear.
Sit still.  Similarly, if we have greed, hatred, and delusion in our hearts,
we should break them down, destroy them
all, discard them all, leaving only purity.
Then, in the realm of
Nirvana, we will see the names of the esteemed practitioners.
It's easy to understand that here, Master Nagarjuna
teaches that any practitioner who is pure in
precepts, pure in concentration, pure in wisdom, and
firmly rooted in those precepts,
concentration, and wisdom—in that position, that place—then Nirvana will appear, regardless of where they are or what place they are in. Let me repeat this for
you, esteemed practitioners: If
we sit here and ask, "
Where is the sky?", we just need to say, "Break down
this house, discard the roof," and the
sky will appear. Similarly,
in our hearts, if we
destroy all greed, hatred, delusion, and ignorance, then Nirvana
will appear, esteemed practitioners. That's how it is
easy to understand: Nirvana is
right here, right here, but because we have
n't broken through ignorance,
we haven't seen Nirvana yet. So, the
sky is also here, because...  We haven't broken through
this roof yet, so we haven't
seen the sky. Okay, that's
very easy to understand.
How do we reach Nirvana? Venerable
Nāgasena said that the Buddha taught
this: When contemplating the Dharma, one clearly sees that the
Dharma is subject to birth and death, that the Dharma is
impermanent, suffering, and non-self, that the Dharma is impure, sorrowful, and full of worry and affliction.
At
that time, Nirvana will manifest itself. Now,
let's ask about the example. Earlier, when the mind-
viewing and contemplation were given, how do you break down
the roof? You'd say you
use a hammer to break it, or a
concrete drill to drill it.
Using those tools, you
can break down the roof and
see the sky. It's the same
here: when contemplating the
Dharma, that is, practicing meditation, when one
clearly sees that the
Dharma is subject to birth and death, that the Dharma is impermanent,
suffering, and non-self, that the Dharma is impure, sorrowful, and full of worry and affliction,
at that time, Nirvana will
manifest itself. Now, we just need to have the
desire to break through ignorance.  When
we renounce worldly life and practice the Dharma, we are
taught how to contemplate
these practices. That's right, dear fellow practitioners. Because
at that time, we leave behind
defilements. For example, we leave behind the
worldly house, we leave behind all
worldly attachments. Only then can
we use meditation.
We stop all
practices. Stop all actions.
At that time, we will break down the house of
ignorance, shatter it, and we will
see Nirvana appear.
Dear fellow practitioners, through
this sutra, we understand more clearly
that Nirvana is a place that is stable,
not
subject to earthquakes, tsunamis,
floods, or wars. There is no爭奪 (struggle/competition) for land. That is where
sentient beings reside, where there is absolute
happiness, complete wisdom, and freedom from all afflictions. That is where there
is immortal life, never to
die, without sorrow, grief, or old age. That is where
all the wishes of
sentient beings are fulfilled. That is what we know,
and that is the place.  That place is right here, right within
our hearts. We can achieve it right in
our minds.
When we break through ignorance, and the way to
break through ignorance is through contemplative thinking, meditation, and
observing precepts, that's how we will
break through ignorance and
become citizens of Nirvana,
enjoying a life with the
highest happiness index
among all realms. As for
our human realm, we say
that the happiness index compared to the human realm
is like this place having this or
that, but the human realm never
has an absolute happiness index because there is suffering from
old age, sickness, and death. How can there be happiness then?
Happiness is only possible when there is no old age,
no sickness, and no death.
So,
absolute happiness is impossible. There are also earthquakes,
wars, natural disasters, floods, and forest fires – that's
suffering. With such suffering, where can
happiness come from? This is only the happiest place compared
to the people here. This country
has the highest happiness index compared to other
countries on Earth.  This land
alone... And the Earth itself only
exists for billions of years before it self-
destructs, meaning it will cease to exist.
Even if we are reborn in this world, we must return to this
human realm, where
another place must be created for us to live
and endure all the
suffering according to our karma, dear fellow practitioners.
Respectfully, dear fellow practitioners, I, the Venerable
Master, share
with you so that we may understand and
receive the teachings of the Great Arhats and
Immortals, so that we may clearly know the true
state of Nirvana, which is truly happy,
without suffering, truly vibrant but
very tranquil, meaning tranquil, without war,
without rivalry, without
suffering, but very vibrant, like the
saints, those who are enjoying
ultimate happiness. Up there, it is very
happy, and we are the ones who have the
full capacity to go
there and live in Nirvana. Here, if
we want to go to the city, we need
money for trains, buses, and everything else.
Here, we only need to become monks and practice the
Dharma.  To practice contemplative thinking,
cultivating morality, concentration, and wisdom, we
can become inhabitants of Nirvana,
enjoying this absolute happiness. We should
n't compete at the level of
seeking relative, artificial happiness in
this worldly realm. That's why the
world is called temporary. Because after life comes death; we don't stay
here forever, so is
n't it all temporary? It's like
we travel a certain distance—let's call it the
Six Realms. Traveling through the six realms is
like a circle. For example, the six realms are
like
petals of a flower. A bee lands here, then lands
here, then
lands here again, because it can't stay in one place forever. We are the same; we come here temporarily for a little while, maybe
twenty or thirty years, then we are reborn as a
crab. A crab lives for two years, for
example, and we come here again for two years, but we live as a
crab, right? Then we
come down here again, and live as a ghost for
many more years.  Therefore, this illusory life is not
permanent, nothing is truly certain.
Sometimes we have to take on the form of animals and suffer,
sometimes we have to go to hell and
suffer. It's very painful, that's why
this realm is called the realm of suffering, full of pain and
suffering. So we
must go to an eternal realm, an eternal realm,
meaning we will never
leave it again. As for where we want to go, that's up to us. That
depends
on the Buddhas and Saints; they are very
self-sufficient. For example, people in the heavenly realms can freely
descend here, meaning the Buddha realm,
right? That's why it's called the Buddhas are everywhere in the
ten directions because their realm is
everywhere, isn't it?
They only manifest themselves for us to
see, it's not that
they are not everywhere. Do you
understand this, dear friends? Because the realm of Nirvana is
everywhere, so they are everywhere, that's why
we say the
Buddhas are always present in all ten directions, meaning they are
always there,
never leaving. But there's something about them.
And we...  We cannot meet the Buddhas
because our minds are preoccupied, so we
cannot see them manifesting to us.
But they are
always present; they are not absent.
We simply don't know it.
Through this text, the mind of the Perfect Enlightenment
also sincerely hopes that all of you, dear fellow practitioners,
will wholeheartedly vow to
cultivate sufficient merit to attain Nirvana,
that is, to have Nirvana manifest within yourselves in
Nirvana. May you attain Nirvana! May you all be
joyful and diligent.
Namo Buddha Shakyamuni. Now, I
ask all of you, dear fellow practitioners, to clasp your hands and
dedicate this merit to all
disciples and
sentient beings throughout the Pure Land, so that all may attain Buddhahood.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music] [
Applause]
[Music]